Hello. How's everyone doing?
>> Good.
>> All right. My name is Jeff McGuire. I'm
uh the democratically elected first
selected for the town of Vand Kingdom of
Andover. Sorry about that. All right.
Um, I'm going to open this meeting, but
I before I do that, I'm going to let
everybody know I expect this meeting to
be conducted with civility and respect
for everybody that's involved. People
may sit there and disagree on the
issues, but I expect civility.
Okay. All right.
So, I'm opening the budget meeting that
the electors and citizens qualify to
vote in the town meeting in the town of
Andover are hereby notified that the
annual budget meeting where the town of
Andover will be held at Andover
Elementary School Gymnasium 35 School
Road on Thursday, April 9th, 2026 at 7
p.m. for the following purpose. to
choose a moderator for said meeting to
receive the budget for the fiscal year
July 1st 2026 to June 30th 2027 as
prepared by the board of finance to
approve a budget for referendum for
fiscal year July 1st 2026 to June 30th
2027 and then to adjourn copies of the
budget are available at town clerk's
office online and here are available if
you need one um this meeting is being
held today on April 9th. And right now
I'm going to turn it over to the board
of finance and the chairperson Robert.
>> Thanks everybody.
>> All right. So we'll open up with
nominations for a moderator for this
committee.
>> Nominate Walmart.
>> I'll second one.
>> Okay. Sh motions. Scott has already
second. We have anything further?
All right. If you can do a vote by hands
on this one.
>> All in favor?
>> Congratulations once again. Wow.
>> All right. I'm going to open up with a
little presentation that the board of
finance has created. Hopefully giving
you a rundown of the budget and the
context you need to evaluate it. We have
a little PowerPoint here. So, I'll run
through this as quickly as I can so I
don't waste any of your time. And when
we're done, we'll entertain questions
and motions and just by charter
understanding motions can be made to cut
something on the budget, but there's no
increasing anything once it's cut. After
that, whether they pass or fail, this
budget will then proceed to referendum.
Budget motion passes and alters the
budget. If it doesn't pass, nothing. All
right. So, we'll have further read. So,
little rundown on the process. We we're
going to go through the process of how
we put this budget together and how it
all came together to create the document
that you have in your hands.
And we have we have our revenue, we have
a summary, we have calculation which
I'll get into a little bit later. It's a
little more complicated this year and
some samples to give you context for an
assessment is what this budget would do.
So the process
we get preliminary operational capital
budgets from all the parts of the town
public works etc. We get from the board
of ed as well. Uh we look at all of
that. The board of finance did review uh
the budget request from AES. We proposed
to them that they consider a smaller
increase. They explained to us in
response that no they really need that
11%. So they rejected that and brought
this budget to this hearing. The board
reviewed everything we could on the town
side. We held a hearing a go where we
ran through a draft version of this.
This will be expanded from then a few at
that meeting. And then we have this
meeting here after which we will have
the referendum the first Tuesday in May
which is the 5th.
So here that's the bottom line numbers
for this budget. Rail and that's our
levy and our share which is 12.65%.
It's 4.25 million which is a increase of
about 3%. The town budget and that's
this is an aggregated budget. This
includes the ops and the capital. It's
going up a little under 4%.
And the endover BOE request AES they're
asking for 10.91.
This comes to a total of about 5.4 in
expenditure. That doesn't necessarily
mean that's a tax.
Here's the split between the three
components of our budget. Cut out side
about a third as a little bit higher,
RAM a little bit lower. And we'll get
into the reasons for that as this goes
on.
So on the town capital side, we have a
number of things that we increased. I
would say item number two is one of the
bigger ones. Just salary increases.
You'll see a lot of 3% increases in
there. We also have, as you know,
probably some staffing that we're having
to bring in a new administrator, an
assistant for that administrator. We've
had some turnover, so we're addressing
that. We're also trying to build out
programs at the community center with
its director
and we did make a few small capital cuts
this year to try to offset some of this
stuff. The other thing the town is
facing and you'll see it on AES as well
is a large healthcare cost increase for
our healthcare insurance for our
employees. And even those who don't take
it, they see a payment in lie of and
that is tied to the cost of a singing
plan they would otherwise take. So
that's hitting both the town and the
school. The consortium we're a part of.
Apparently that was the best they could
do this year.
So this is the town side again. Austin
Capital. This 5-year look back. This
started as me trying to remind myself
where we came from, where we're going.
So you can see here the year-over-year
change from the last 5 years and then
cumulative number and then our proposed
increase of all about 4% this year. If
we were to pass this budget over a
6-year period would be up 28% on the
town side
of that. So the annual board of
education brought their budget. It's
about a $5 million request as you can
see about 11% increase. They are
requesting a new teacher for the first
grade. They lost well they have the
school psychologist part of that issues
the loss of a grant that was paying for
half of that contractual salary
increases. Uh I already mentioned the
loss of grant money, special education
costs and again that 21% healthcare
premium increase that gets pretty hard
on the school side.
Here's the AES budget history. These are
the amounts passed for the school budget
over the last 5 years. You can see in
2020 we're bottoming out. As you may
know, you enrollment had declined for
years preceding that and then has
started to slowly rebound. So you see
some increases last year as you know and
some of you know was a 5% increase.
Originally requested 8.8 that didn't
pass and became five. So cumulatively
over 5 years is 17%. If this were to
pass, you come in at just about 30% over
six years.
RAM. So RAM's total budget is 34
million, which we have that total that
says 5% share. They're going up 3.4.
There's a complication this year with
RAM in that they recently discovered
they had too much money saved up over
the years. is apparently an error that's
been running for about 5 years and they
owe the various towns that are part of
it money back. Our share of that with
interest is 258,87615.
We are to get that back in some fashion
this year as a reduction in our levy.
However, the levy number you see here on
this slide is what I would say is the
actual number. That is the levy that
feeds into their $34 million budget. To
take the 258 off confuses the issue in
my opinion. So we left it at that for
now. But when we get to the taxation
part of this, we take it into account.
So our levy, as you may know, is based
on a ratio of the students from each
town that go to RAM. We are probably
close to our need in terms of the
students we had ran versus the other two
towns. So once again, and this has been
happening for years now, our levy
percentage dropped. So even though the
president is going up 3.4, our levy does
not quite go up 3.4. We're down to 129
students of the roughly thousand that
are there.
This is the levy history for as you can
see it's down quite a bit and this has
to do not with their budgets going down
but again the ratio of Andover students
to run and marble.
Now the proposed increase this year for
us is about 3% for our levy. However
again with that offset the result is a
negative number. So we kind of get a
break but it's a oneshot thing. We're
getting 5 years of excess money back.
That's not coming again next year. So
just keep that in mind. So over the last
six years with this budget to pass,
they're down. Our levy is down, I should
say, 18 1.5%.
But on this slide, as you can see, their
overall budget is up about, you know, 9%
over 5 years and would be 13ish if we
were to pass this budget. if you were to
pass the rail referendum as well.
So, we also have to look at revenue and
then figure out what our tax rate is
going to be. Now, there's a Connecticut
state law that's been in effect for a
while that we've never run into before
where motor vehicle mill rate is capped.
So, if we cross a certain threshold, we
have to split the mill rates. We'll get
into it a little bit more later. and how
I calculated that and again this is
theoretical we don't set the mill rate
until after a budget passes
our revenues are up slightly uh we get
some interest income we get some grant
income uh education cost sharing now
that's not an increase we get like
clockwork every year and I don't think
that the amount of it has changed in at
least 5 years it's about $2 million it's
a huge part of our funding that we get
from the state and our permits fees, you
know, when you go to the top and what
have you even
so
property tax revenue that can be
affected by, you know, it's not a
revalu. So, we're not getting a huge
change on the grant list or anything
like that, but you know, if houses are
built in town, that can increase the uh
any governmental revenues, that's I
think the grant money in the ECS and
everything like that. our charges for
services and our interest income is
estimated about 150. That obviously
depends on exactly what the interest
rate is in our account.
This is a 5-year look back of what we've
done via taxation. The amount of money
that this town has raised from its
residents over the last 5 years.
Cumulatively over 5 years, our taxes
have gone up 2.7%.
This year, this budget requests 6.7. So
if you incorporate that, if this budget
were to pass over six years, the taxes
would have gone up 13.42%.
So
last year's no rate, if you look back
one, the middle column here, as you may
recall, is 31.59.
That's underneath the threshold for the
auto thing. So it was a one combined
bill rate. That's where we've been for
many years.
But this budget,
if it were passed, crosses the
threshold. And so in order to calculate
it,
first thing I did is I looked at the R,
calculated the maximum we could get out
of that based on that cap, deducted it
from the total taxation you would need
to fund this budget, and then apply
the rest to the remaining grand list of
real estate and personal property
section, your houses basically. And that
comes to 33.5. That would be the real
estate number.
So, we thought it'd be helpful for
context to look at what these numbers
translate to for your tax bill depending
on how your house is valued. If you see
on the left, we have a couple of
different examples and then the mill
rate last year, what the mill rate would
be this year again if this budget passes
and the differential. So if your house
has died at about 350,000 and by the way
in case anybody is unaware the way it
works is your house is assessed and do
an assessment usually about five every 5
years. I think it got bumped back one
year. We'll do it next year but we do it
about every 5 years. They take what your
house is theoretically worth on the open
market and apply 70% of that and that
becomes your assessment. So if your
house is worth $500,000 on the open
market, you're assessed for 350 and then
the mill rate's applied. So you would
have paid 11,56 last year. You'd be
asking for 11,725. This year, meaning
your taxes would go up 668 for your real
estate.
Cars much smaller obviously. We just ran
a couple different numbers here again.
And you can see the differences are
pretty minor.
But you would combine the two. I don't
know how many cars everybody has in
town. I'm fortunate that I have one old
car.
So what we're going to do now is we are
going to entertain questions there. All
three boards are up here. So we can have
people come up ask a question. We can
also entertain motions. And again just
to reiterate if a motion passes the
budget is changed. It goes through a
referendum that way. If it doesn't pass
ultimately the budget knows you didn't
hear anything. So when you come up we're
going to give you a microphone. We're
going to ask you to state your name and
your address so that the meeting minutes
can be reported accurately. I'm going to
turn it over to Walt
for this part of the meeting.
That's my shield.
Okay, Linda's going to help me. She's
going to go around with the microphone
because in this room, if you don't have
the mic, I can't hear you up here.
Neither can members in the boards. So,
if you have a question or comment, if
you raise your hand, we'll get the mic
to you.
>> Gentleman in the back, you raising your
hand. I see it's been up for a while.
>> If you could state your name and
address, we started so that the uh town
clerk can get it in case we need the
information.
>> And we're trying to keep comments,
questions, free.
>> Oh, really simple.
>> Uh just hoping uh hi Michael Greenhouse.
Uh what else is needed?
155 road. Uh number can you go back I
think two or three slides just where you
said uh the taxes uh increase over 5
years was 2.7%.
And then I said the proposed is 6.7
and then you're saying over 6 years 2.7
+ 6.7%.
kind of I was the calculation
>> the uh I think it well it was a Frenchy
formula so hopefully the math is correct
but I will double check it right now on
my phone
>> that was
you get to
>> you can't add percentages together you
can't add 6% 5% from 11% doesn't work
address please
>> uh Sarah Becker 20 road
I just want to say thank you to the
board of select command and the board of
finance to the board of education and to
all the members of the public that are
here tonight. We are all here because we
care deeply about our town and about the
people. We are also all fortunate enough
to live in a place where we are able to
express our opinions and make our voices
heard which is not the case in so many
parts of the world. This is democracy at
work. Now tonight we're going to offer
some opposing views. We're going to
argue. We're going to debate. We're
going to disagree. Some of us will have
the outcome we desire and some of us
will not. The good news is this is not
the end of the democratic process.
Nothing tonight is final. So, as we
debate, argue, and disagree, let us all
please remember that we are all here
because we care so deeply about our town
and that we're all neighbors. Let us
speak kindly, courteously, and
respectfully. So it's to model civic
engagement for the next generation.
Thank you all for being here.
>> Anyone else?
>> This is unusual.
>> This warming up
72 Pin.
I have been an educator in our
elementary school for 19 years. I go on
and on about all the amazing things
maybe the school has done for children.
Not to mention the amazing successes
that AES graduates have achieved. My
guess is some of you already know that
and for others your mind is brand new.
So I want to speak tonight as a taxpayer
and as someone who represents the people
who don't have a voice here. Nearly 20%
of the residents of Andover are under
the age of 18. They don't vote or act on
opportunity to speak to these meetings,
but they are directly affected impacting
by these decisions. Year after year here
in the state of Illinois, the school
budget is burdened on taxpayers. Here's
the reality. The success of the school
keeps our property values up. While the
school does need to be fiscally
responsible, if you've attended
Washington or recently, then you would
know that handover is the lowest rate
spending in our peer group. What we need
to hear are solutions to the tax burden.
And we need to hear solutions to the tax
burden and real plans to increase the
town's revenue. That doesn't sound like
a school problem. That sounds like the
problem our leadership's been working to
address. As taxpayers, we need to change
the narrative. Stop asking about
preschool and start asking how do we
grow our tax base. Our leaders should be
seeking economic opportunities rather
than pointing fingers. I agree. We
should be asking our residents,
especially those on fixed incomes, to
continue bearing the weight while doing
nothing to expand the base. Whereas the
plan is to attract the families, new
businesses, new revenue streams. At the
January board of education meeting, when
the superintendent proposed the budget
with a 1% increase, she recognized that
was high and began making suggestions to
use the school to increase revenue. We
should be doing the same thing. And that
doesn't have to be a choice between
preserving the town's character or
supporting the school. Many of us chose
to live here for the natural beauty. But
preserving what we love doesn't mean
doing nothing. Without thoughtful growth
or risk of become risk becoming a town
that can't sustain itself. Growth
doesn't have to mean overdevelopment. It
can mean small intentional steps of
strengthening our town while keeping its
character intact. So please help me
change narrative. Let's get out of the
cycle of cutting the investment that
actually make this town attractive.
Just want to get back to the question
asked earlier. I checked for math. It's
right. I know it doesn't
>> look right. But if you just take the
bottom line number that the increase the
1.2 million and you compare it to the
you know that one that's how you get
13.42. It is it is right.
Why?
>> Questions about the budget. That's what
we're here for. Answer the questions
about the budget, not personal
statement. Basically,
everyone has a chance to ask.
>> Hi, I just have a question about the um
>> name and address.
>> Uh 231 billion. Uh question about the
request for a full-time psychologist.
So, I'm a teacher. I just want the
information. Um is it my understanding
that you guys halftime psychologist and
then that grant was lost and now you
were seeking a full-time position or is
it a full-time position? Like I was
trying to figure out where the full-time
position came from.
>> So she is almost full-time. Um the hours
were increased when we received the
grant, but but that is what is needed
for the amount of hours for testing and
for student support. We don't have
another person aside from that school
psychologist that's providing that
support for students. And I believe the
grant was was it 53,000
>> 43
>> was it 44
>> 44,000 for the past two years. So um
followup question clinical services
through IEPs are provided by the
psychologist not by like a school
counselor or social worker.
>> So that's the only service provider for
that service on IEPs.
>> Yes. Thank you.
>> Next
is going to be a short meeting.
She's comfortable with
>> Kathy De Roer 232 Bear Swamp Road. So my
question to the board of finance is in
the unassigned fund we have $2.1
million.
That's money we've been taxed on. And in
this budget, you didn't apply any of
that towards a $2.77
mill. and I I really think you should
and asking me why you didn't do that in
this budget.
>> Sure, I can address that. Uh, a couple
things. Yes, the last audit shows that
we have 2.1 in there. Um, one of the
things that we've been working on is,
you know, the last audit using Jupiter,
I think 25, right? So, I I'm not 100%
certain from then till now if it's up
even a little more or what have you.
Last year, the board did choose to apply
$190,000 as a fund balance and we didn't
do it this year. I would say there's two
reasons for that. First is, well, I
remember having a conversation last year
before Eric left about the state
recommended amount that a town has in
reserve on a side fund balance. And
apparently the recommendation is two
months of the year, one sixth of your
budget, that's 16.67%.
The 2.1 million we have is about 15%.
Now, as we talked about during that
meeting, our town is that's a that's a
one number for every town in Connecticut
and Towns Fair. Our town doesn't have
all the same risks as the town as a
flood plane on the coast. So, 15 may be
fine,
but there was some concern about
reducing it. Also, we thought we should
take it to the town. Uh, and that's kind
of that is an option we have. Should
this budget fail? We could come back to
that issue and say, well, maybe we take
100,000 from it. Everybody should just
bear in mind basically a tax to tax at
least the way it works is every 100,000
is a percentage point roughly, right?
Because if you look at last year's
taxes, it's almost bang on 10 million,
right? So, we did look at that. We
considered that on the board. We had a
discussion on it two, three meetings ago
and said, you know what, we didn't feel
comfortable putting that in at this
stage. But we we didn't think of that.
>> Got it.
>> So, uh, the state of Connecticut
recommends 10 to 15% of the annual
operating expenditures. So, if we look
at what we're looking at this year,
13,684,000
at 12%, that's 1.6 million that we can
have in or should have in unassigned
funds. That's at 12%. At 10%, it's 1.3
million. We got 2.1. This is money we've
been taxed on and I'm I'm for the
budget. You did a great job, but we need
to use this money is my opinion.
>> All right. The only thing I'll say to
that is I'm not sure where the
disconnect is between the bold I I do
remember the 12% 1215, you know,
something like that being the
recommendation. and was a little
surprised when Eric said last year that
he had heard that the recommendation
from it's probably OPM uh had gone up to
that two 212 16th number. So I'm a
little uncertain as to what the state is
on that. It used to be many years ago
you may some of you may remember we
deliberately drew down on them because
we had so much saved up that we were
being told that at the state level we
might have a problem getting grants. So
I'm always trying to rightsize that
honestly and I'm happy to look at it
again should we need to go there. But at
the same time one thing to keep in mind
too is we have our money a lot of our
money on every fund in the state
account. It's called a stiff account.
It's our it's the savings account the
state sets up for towns to use and
provides actually decent interest as
opposed to what we used to do in the
past if we had our money and check the
accounts made nothing. So that interest
income you saw on a presentation of
about 150 a year that's predicated on
how much money we've got in there at
savings rate. We draw it down. We also
in fact have an income stream. So it's
kind of a balance but I hear thanks for
the question.
Hi, I'm Eli Brooks. Um, 55 the Solar
Road. Um, I'm looking over the budget
and I see a transportation increase 27%.
So, I didn't know if you can go into
that a little more and why you can't
take part of that increase and give it
to the school. 27% seems really high
when Ann was only asking that board of
education is only asking for a little
over 11.
Bear with me one second.
>> Unfortunately, I did not get
Can you just tell me where uh which
section that's under the children?
>> Actually, she was looking to the school
budget. So, oh, it's the school budget.
I apologize. Like, why am I looking to
tell my phone? Yeah.
>> All right, hold on a minute.
>> Have we looked at that line item in the
school budget?
>> Yeah. You have?
>> I'm asking the board of education board
finance. Have you looked at that line
item budget?
>> It's in there.
>> Okay. So, listen. I I'm just going to
tell you, we've had a lot of stuff going
on in town. Not sure if everybody's
aware. Town administrator, treasurer,
uh, assistant to the treasurer. Uh
there's a lot of things going on and I I
don't think we we should be looking and
as Kathy Roachers was asking about how
to pay for this budget. We should be
looking at how to sit there and
financially and fiscally handle this
budget because it's not just this year
that this will be an issue. It will be
next year. And for everyone here who
thinks that I might be against
education, that is far from the truth.
What I have a problem with and honestly
I've had a problem with this for years
is that the prek which is daycare just
let us understand it's dayare dayare
this is my issue
>> here's my question
>> here is my question
>> I have been told for multiple years that
that part of
That part of the budget is covered 100%
by grants and tuition. I have asked the
question multiple times if it is covered
100%. I'm asking the board of education
that does the tuition and the grants
cover 100% of that cost.
>> Can we have the board of edit actually
talk about the transportation number?
>> Yes.
>> I won't address those comments. Rama,
you'll absolutely address what you just
asked me to, which was the question that
was at hand. Thank you, Mrs. Brooks. And
the question at hand was about
transportation. I think you're confusing
the fact that yes, the school does rent
a vehicle from the town, but it doesn't
appear in the town's budget. It appears
in ours. You are absolutely right. We do
offer um we have special transportation.
Um, and I think that might be the
confusion is that um, we don't use that
vehicle for free. Um, we're charged
$3.50 a mile for that. And because we
are, that is added to that. So that is
the transportation costs for the
children to take the bus as well as
special education costs. And any student
that is outplaced, we're also
responsible for those transportation
costs. So, what you're looking at under
transportation is our transportation
costs for students that go elsewhere,
the transportation costs to get kids
here to Andover Elementary School, and
the rental of the town vehicle to cover
the transportation costs here for
special education services. That was the
difference there. Thank you,
>> Valerie. Can I follow that up? What was
the cause for it to have gone down so
much from 25? We follow procedure. If
you have a question, raise your hand,
please.
>> You going to do it.
>> Go ahead.
>> She's deferring.
>> Anna Josh from 260 Air Swamp.
Um
I I'm asking um
to see I think it's reasonable um to see
line item salaries um for teachers for
what we get bottom line. So bottom line
for teachers it says um what the
salaries recommended. So I'm asking for
a bottom line of um where that number
came from. I think that's a reasonable
request. I don't think that number came
out of the air. I sure hope not. Um,
and along similar lines, I think it
relates to the question related uh to
preschool, which
was an unreasonable I think answer um in
boomings on the crowd and we were asked
to all be respectful of each other. It's
a mathematical question as to what money
is coming in
and whether the money that's coming in
covers all of the expenses for that
particular program for the school. So I
think it's reasonable to see the numbers
line items for where that number comes
from. Um people might be adding things
correctly. I think town residents should
be able to see line items for where the
bottom line is. Which line items are
totally the bottom line. It's not an
unvisible request. And it was stated
that you're not with respect to not
going to answer that question.
Are you choosing not to answer that
question because you don't want to? Are
you choosing because you're barred to
answer that question or because you
don't have that information? That's that
question is related to the the preschool
question. But to my request to see the
line items for the total salaries for
where that bottom number comes from, I
think that's a very very reasonable um
request. So I understand that you may
not have that on hand obviously, but
line items, I'm sure we're added to a
spreadsheet somewhere to get to a bottom
line. So if we're trying to be fiscally
responsible and understand where those
numbers are coming from,
I think the public should be able to see
line items for getting these tickets.
So yours was a very valid question.
Thank you really asked. I respectfully
so. So I appreciate that I will answer
your question because it was a question.
Thank you. You're welcome. So you'll
notice if you look at the town budget
and art, it is not none of it's
separated out where you see the five
public works workers what they did. So
on our side you wouldn't see every
single teacher.
>> I would request that then the town in
general every single line items where
those totals are coming from.
>> So I hear that as next year that is what
the board of finance requests.
Absolutely. By all means, every Why for
next year? Why not for this year?
>> Why can't it be done for this year? We
have a month before we go. Well, I hope
to vote. So, why why can't we see those?
I We Where did the number come from?
>> Well, that that I will explain to you.
That's where I was getting with that.
But if that's the request of the board
of finance this year for them to see
teacher number one, teacher number two,
public works course number one. If that
is what they requested, that's what
would have been done. Let me answer your
question. I would be glad to when the
salary line items put together, we start
every year at zero. And what we do is we
list the employees, uh, Jod and I, she
start for our finance person. We do
what's called a salary projection. We
start that in November and we look to
see what we project or what the salary,
what the employee number is, what the
roles are, first grade teacher, second
grade teacher. We look then at the
contracts. We have negotiated contracts
with every single member of the school
community. We look and see is this
person moving up to step two? Did they
go from bachelors to masters? You know,
step one, step two. We create a
spreadsheet then and that spreadsheet is
a projection, a salary projection
spreadsheet. That is where we get that
number from. That is absolutely the
proper way to do it. We start again
every year because we want to make sure
that that projection sheet is accurate
and where those numbers come from are
the contracts that have been negotiated.
And we're very lucky because our
teachers contracts is been negotiated.
So we know three years out from now what
we can expect in nonurp we're three
years out from now we know what we can
expect. So that is very helpful. In
terms of the um preschool salaries,
I urge you to look back at all the
financials from the board of education
meetings because every single board of
education financials has one every month
that tells you we bring in tuition
$249,000,
$6,000 a child.
We also are the recipients of the early
start which used to be called school
readiness grant and we are the
recipients of a smart start grant. So if
you add up the two grants as well as the
$249,000
there's $435,000
that comes in. That is where those eight
salaries are paid from. And so I would
remind everybody that preschool is not
an option. It gets brought up at every
board of selection meeting, every board
of finance meeting, and every board of
education meeting. The financials are
there. I urge you to look back. Those
numbers never change. The only thing
you'll see is that there's a word in
front of it that says anticipated. It
says anticipated because preschool, it
is a different entity from K through
six. If a family decides that they don't
want to send their kid any longer to
preschool and they pull them out in
December, that is no longer revenue for
us. If a child turns three during the
course of the year and they decide that
they are coming in, provided we have
space, that will be a change in revenue.
So the word anticipated is there solely
for us to understand that those numbers
would change.
So, I guess this would now be a question
directed to the board of finance. Has
the board of finance asked for a line
item spreadsheet from the board of
education?
>> Sure.
>> For for not just for teacher salaries,
support staff salaries, but for all
salaries to see where these total bottom
line numbers are coming from. If we're
trying to understand
if if if we're trying to understand
where these total numbers are coming
from, has the board of finance asked for
these line item figures and has have
they reviewed them to see that the line
items total the bottom line? All right,
I'm going to let them answer that, but
we really used up these three minutes.
>> So, this issue I personally didn't ask
for because I view that as a board of
education's primary goal. Um there have
been members of our board who have
desired more data from the super but my
take has always been that the role of
the board of education is to put
together this budget and explain why
they need what they need and so I had
not personally didn't feel the need to
have this teacher salary disagregated
and show every single one in the same
way that we don't typically show again
public works or anything else uh like
that line by line. We do have it on the
town side that we can reduce this
budget.
Uh but that is the situation between the
board of ed and board of finance. I we
get a presentation from them at during
the budget process to say this is why
we're asking for an increase. We're
asking to hire teachers. We have
contractional increases etc. And this is
the line next door. So no, I did not ask
them to give me each teacher.
>> Is there still time to do so?
Well,
>> I'd have to I'd have to work with them
on that to see what we can do in
>> a month, right?
>> What? Uh, yeah. All right. Probably
three or four weeks. So, between now and
comment on that,
>> good evening and thank you everyone for
for being here. My name is Doris
Maldonado. I live at 33 Citill um Spy
Mill Road and my daughters are eight and
three. Um, while I'm speaking as a
parent, I'm also contracted by the
Connecticut Early Office of Early
Childhood and Eastern Connecticut
University as a parent ambassador for
children 0 to 5. And over demographics
are telling. Um, with a median age of
52, uh, our long-term stability depends
on the younger families coming in who
choose to move here and stay. Right now,
we're last in our region um in per pupil
spending with over $418,000
in cuts since 2020. Even as enrollment
is growing, our families feel this. We
want families to stay in Andover because
of its potential and it's a great
community to grow our families with
confidence. We should not lose
enrollment and per pupil state aid tied
to our students.
How are we um how are we protecting our
children and our our community and
future of our town without a competitive
school budget? The school building is
one of the the few public places in uh
that serves all of Andover residents,
our seniors, our community members, our
community groups, our children, and is
accessible for people with disabilities.
Investing now is
>> a question.
>> Yes. How are we protecting our children
and the future without a competitive
budget?
>> Is that from the board of finance or the
board of education?
>> The board of finance.
>> Thank you.
>> Well, I'm not saying that the budget we
brought before you, but it's the one
that the board of ed believes in fact
protects the best interest of the kids
and against the education we need to
take care of. That's the reason it's
there.
>> It's 11% increase.
>> It's 11%
11% increase. I don't understand why
you're saying we're not protecting the
interest of our students at 11%
increase.
>> Maybe
my name is Georgia Conrad. I live at 117
Lakeside County. I have a pretty easy
question to bring the phone a little
closer.
>> Now that we have um the panels on the
roof of the school, shouldn't we see a
reduction in electricity?
I thought there was there was a
projection. Hang on a second.
>> So, it's going to take at least a year
before we start to see a reduction from
that. They are still in the process of
interconnecting them and they're not
actually completely active yet. So, so
hopefully next year, yes, we will see an
increase there.
Yeah, it's a 0% increase is what we're
anticipating. So,
>> hi folks.
Scott 168 Road. Um,
I have a question for finance. How do
these numbers um compare inflation? Have
you done those calculations? The
percentage increases here. How do they
compare with inflation per year?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So when I first looked at
the did those five year low facts I did
look at CPI which is the government's
inflation calculation and the average
CPI increase over that 5year period that
I have on those charts was 4.44% I
believe that's off the top of my head
was about just about shy 4 and a half
each year total and a half something
like that.
>> It was it was higher it was in the 20s.
Yes. I don't remember because I don't
have that chart up in front of me. I
didn't include it with this. There was
just frankly amount of space. But uh
yes, that's correct. And as you may
remember, we went through some pretty
rough years there. Uh we had that one
spike 8 9% inflation. Um and the CPI
calculator picks that up. So if you look
at if you were say went to the social
security website, they use CPI to
calculate their cost of living increases
every year and you'll see explained
there how they do it and it's it's very
comparable to that as well on the social
security website. So you can either look
it up there, you can just Google up CPI
calculator and and look it up yourself.
But the the increase in memory serves
per average was about 4.4.
>> Okay. So, but the total is somewhere in
the low 20s. If you look at that bottom
number there,
>> yeah, I I I have a chart somewhere. I
have to
>> bring the details to the chart. This
this budget even with, you know, the
large increase in education budget, the
overall budget is still quite a bit
lower than the total inflation cost over
that same time. Correct.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Anybody wants to know, I'm going
to pass this around. I've I've done some
of this research and uh if you want to
say see what I found it's it's in there.
I'll pass this around want to see it
and if you download it before I uh I
just updated it even so downloaded
last year.
Good evening. Rod Lang
Road.
>> Question is for the board of editor.
We're hiring two people we're looking
for, right? We're hiring for a
psychologist in a sixth grade. Is that
what we're looking for?
>> No. No. We already have school
psychologists. It's the same person
that's been doing that job for three
years now. Um it's just that about half
of her salary was covered by a grant and
the grant is going away. So we we are
hiring one sixth grade teacher is what
this budget is asking for.
>> Okay. The other part of my question is
today I was looking online and and I saw
there was an occupational therapist
position posted the 24th of March for
somebody to start July 1st. Um
>> yes that would be for summer school for
special education and that's due to your
retirement.
>> So the the service that we're paying
because it says services that we're
paying now 45700
for therap for occupational therapy. So
is to that or is this under that?
>> It's a it's a totally different area of
special education like physical therapy,
speech therapy, occupational therapy,
they're all separate entities. That's
covered under this bucket you're asking
for.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Um, hi, my name is Michelle Lawrence. I
live at 149 Lake Road. Um, there's a lot
of acronyms being thrown around and ask
special education teacher. I think we
really should clarify some of this. So,
I can't clarify it. So, I'm going to ask
if somebody could clarify
IEP, the need for a psychologist in
special education.
And why not psychologist? Because it's
not for medical diagnosis. We're not
getting therapy in school. is for kids
to actually access their education.
Okay, which is by law
what we have to do in a public school
and what an OT is and why we need an OT
in school for a kid to access education
with equitable.
Okay, these are things we need to know
if we don't know them about education.
we should ask those questions not as to
why we have to fund it. So Valerie,
could you please answer those questions?
>> I will give you the quick version
because I know a lot of people don't
have the same special education. Um the
quick version is yes. In fact, um, every
school has students that have, um,
special needs, and some of them you can
see, some of them you can't see, some of
them can be, um, taken care of in a
regular classroom setting. Some of them
can't be taken care of in a regular
classroom setting. Some of them require
adaptive stuff, technology, equipment,
transportation.
Some of them don't. Some of them are
just academic. But what we are required
by law to do is to provide trained and
certified people to administer those
services. That is non-negotiable. That
is the law. And we do get some funding
for things like that. Special education
funding and other things we do not get
funding for. But it is the law. When we
say OT and occupational therapist, you
must be an OT certified person to
perform those services. When we say GT,
that's physical therapy. You must be a
licensed and certified physical
therapist to provide those services. Uh
there are other areas where you have a
choice of support service people. Maybe
a social worker could conduct that.
Maybe a psychologist. We only have one.
We have a school psychologist. Most
other schools have multiple people that
will service these individuals. We only
have one person that services though. We
have a speech therapist as well as an
LP. Um, when we say IEP, it's an
individualized educational plan. Again,
it is a binding legal document. And when
a team gets together and decides what
that child requires for services, we
don't get to say, "Let's talk about that
for a second." We may or may not be
doing it. As a matter of fact, when we
make our schedule for how much we need
in OT speech, we don't just make that
up. I don't know, three days a week. No,
we look at those IEPs and they very
specifically say this child receives a
half an hour three times a week. This
child receives an hour twice a month.
This child receives consultation
services. We make the schedules then.
And when we make the schedules, it tells
us, it dictates to us how many hours of
service in a week they need of these
services. So some years we will see a
reduction in PT services because we have
less service requirements. Other years
we will need more services. And when
that happens, I don't have a choice. We
don't have a choice. we must find
somebody to provide those services is
non-negotiable in every school district
not just
so that is how we would make the
schedule for what goes into a budget for
all of our special education services
they are mandated there is no options no
hopefully that answers your question
here
>> additional questions
No chat
questions.
>> Hi, I'm Jose Rivera. 33 develop um
they said to keep the statements. I just
want to say that the reason I moved to
this town was my family
priority among the staff school system.
And from what I'm understanding and the
experience I've had since we've been
here is handled over per student
expenditure is the lowest in the region
for our surrounding neighbors. So I
think they've met the criteria of doing
what they need to do for their annual
budget. Uh, as to what was said earlier
about getting the line item for
salaries, if that's going to be required
about from the board of ed, that should
also be for the town with public works.
Uh, it should be across the board. It
shouldn't just be on on the board of
education. Um,
did not appreciate the statement that
was made earlier about prek daycare.
Totally disagree with that. Was very
offended by having young children.
But
at the end of the day, order finance
does their budget. Everyone does their
budget. The question is what's going to
maintain our community keeping our home
values stable and from my perspective
and board of ed from superintendent down
has done an excellent job and what
they're required to do and I support the
fundament
that's what we're here for to answer
questions. at this point in time.
>> We got a bunch of people over here.
>> Good evening, Edward 63 Road. I'd like
to call a question.
>> Okay.
>> Going on.
No one has made a motion, but I'm going
to let our town attorney
has opinion on this.
>> That's
absolutely correct. No one nobody's made
a motion, somebody could make a motion
to approve the budget and then if people
want want to change it, they could make
motions to amend it. That's the way it's
supposed to work. And uh you call you
can call a question uh after that. It
requires a twothird vote though to to
get the vote. Okay, good enough.
Nice.
>> Jo,
I'm not going to make a motion right
now. I was going to ask the board of
finance a couple things. I know that as
a former board of finance member, I was
very interested in how things were going
to go this year and wanted to, you know,
watch every meeting. I know that at
different times you all had different
opinions on making some cuts because
bringing forward you know a 6.7%
increase by taxation and then you know a
really big expenditure increase that the
town was going to be married to. You had
some options. You know I kind of want to
align with Kathy D. Roser said earlier
was brought up that maybe you could put
some fund balance against it or a lot of
you were in favor of possibly cutting
some of the capital funds this year for
the town. Um I don't know if people are
aware but the capital funds what you see
on this budget page is what's
contributed each year but the town has
accounts that have a lot of money
already in them. So you wouldn't be
bankrupting the town by asking for a
small reduction. Um so I guess my
question is
why to keep the taxation down why we
wouldn't have done that this year in the
year of transition when there's probably
not going to be a lot of projects going
forward.
>> All right, I'll take this one. So we did
make some small reductions in the
capital budget. As you saw during the
presentation, the capital budget is
down. um we try to do justice with that.
Uh the reason is you're correct we have
a variety of funds in town. Uh and we
did in fact look at the nearly completed
2425 audit and for instance if you look
at the budget you know we used to be
putting in for several years $50,000 a
year into this multi-use building fund.
I looked at the audit and you know we
built up something like $400,000 on that
bond and some of the things that we
might have used it for we got some grant
money and what have you. So in the end
after debating it we decided to zero
that out this year. It doesn't mean the
fund wasn't wasted. We're not going to
load 50 grand into it this year.
Similarly we made a small cut. Didn't
love it but made a small cut to fire
equipment fund because we looked at what
we had in there. We look think about the
obligations that we have. We have a
lease on a truck. We have I know I have
a request coming for a compressor, but
we have enough money in there. We
thought that we could get away with a
small reduction assuming that fund. We
did leave a number of these these
funding levels alone. And for reasons
for that, I'm just following roadway. I
think we made a lot of progress over the
last 10 years since roads at this town.
And I want to keep that going and board
us in agreement on that one. We didn't
really have any designer cut
specifically also because the 385 you
see there that was a fun move last time
last year to turn it into budget three.
So it used to be 410. We left the trees
alone again. I think we've done great
work there and it needs to be funded.
Bridging culvers incredibly fun. We do
have a bunch of money built up in there.
You might be fooled by it if you go to
look at an audit and say oh there's
something 600 someone thousand. The
reason for that is bridge and culvert
fund is designed to deal with bridge
projects in town that are our roads not
state roads and whatnot where we can get
grant money 100% reimbursement when we
do long hill road we're going to
ultimately get all our money bridging
funds for those that we get 50/50 grants
for them for half the cost and I'm being
told that something like that one of
those projects could run us a million
dollars
So, we're trying to build that fund up.
Cutting that would probably be
irresponsible. So, we didn't do it. We
increased a little bit in open space,
but if you look at the chart, you'll see
a couple years ago we put 50,000, cut it
down to 10 last year to get a budget
through, but we put it back to 25, not
all the way back up. But we thinking to
ourselves, the whole purpose of that
fund is to build up some money so that
the piece of property were to come on
the market that the town could get. We
need a mechanism so that we can actually
go and utilize it. So we're trying to
plan for the future there. So the
building maintenance fund was the other
one. We got an increase request. Uh I
believe that was when we got the budget
from the Boris selectman and we decided
yeah that there's some justification for
that. it has to do with car garage
work on an old building, you know, that
we think we need the funding for. So, we
did look at the general funds. It's just
it's a little difficult to cut these
things down knowing
that we have these needs 10, 5, 10 years
down the road. And I'll just say one
more time about using fund balance to
defay the cost of taxation for a year.
You can do that and we've done it in the
past carefully, but bear in mind it's a
oneshot thing. It's not revenue, right?
So, you have to be careful. That's why
we did what we did on the capital
budget.
>> Sorry.
>> I just want one clarification before we
go any further.
The motion end debate. Basically, I need
a motion to send the budget to
referendum. And if that passes, that's
the end of the discussion.
>> Can I just make that motion? I don't
need a microphone. And gentlemen, old
commentary road. Can I make the motion
to push the budget to referendum?
>> Second.
>> Okay.
name or address the person making the
motion have been very successfully
microphone
28 road
second Mike Greenhouse
155 road
>> okay at this point is there any
discussion on the motion
>> no
Hearing none,
>> I'm going to call for a virtual unless
someone objects.
>> All in favor of moving the budget to
referendum, please signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> Those opposed, say nay.
>> Nay.
>> In the opinion of the moderator, the
eyes have.
>> Those four.
>> I make a motion to adjurnn.